Now, what do physicists do with all that?
The point is that if we want to deal with real world measurements, we must specify which information
from this mathematical construct, the wavefunction or state vector we want to extract, that is which
physical quantity, more precisely which dynamic variable we want to measure.
Among them, for example, the position, momentum, the energy, the angular momentum and so on.
What mathematicians and physicists do is to define an operator, which, as the world says, operates
on the wavefunction or state vector to extract, to project, to obtain a specific piece of information
associated with the observable examples of mathematical operator operators.
Every one of us knows are the addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operators.
For example, the multiplication operator X on two quantities, A and B to obtain and other quantities
C as A times B equal c that simple that this is a meaning of operator at this point is an operator.
Similarly, one can conceive of an more abstract operator, let's call it all, acting on a state vector
CI.
If we consider this operation as a formal equivalence with an act of measurement of a dynamic variable
that is observable of a system, the output of this operation should tell us something about the outcome
of this measurement and which is always a number as a quantity and which usually we will call always
lamda a number, which represents the expected value from this measurement, the so-called eigenvalue.
And you write that the operator all operates on the state lactobacilli and gives is equal lamda times,
BPCI lamda the outcome of a measurement or more broadly, simply an observation.
It could be the perfect example.
The position of a particle lambda would be then it is in position at the position and at three centimeters
in some reference system.
This equation is therefore called the Eigen Funk.
The Eigen equation, sorry, the Igen equation.
It is the mathematical procedure.
We have to perform in order to make predictions once we know the experimental setup and the boundary
conditions stated a bit more precisely, one should say that each dynamic variable, for example, position,
omentum, angular momentum, energy and so on, is associated with an so called self ajoint operator,
the observable.
The operator is the observable associated to that dynamic variable that acts on the state vector of
the quantum of the quantum system CI and which furnishes Escala quantity, the eigenvalue lambda.
I said self ajoint, this is not so important, subagent means that the complex conjugate of the operator
is again the operator, but these mathematical aspects that are not so important for our purposes here
simply remember the connection between the classical notion of dynamic variable and its counterpart
in quantum mechanics as operator, the observable.
To avoid a possible source of confusion, let us state this again from another perspective, operators
are not numbers one, two, three, four, five, etc are numbers, whereas.
Plus minus.
Multiplication or division are binary operators binary because they combine two numbers called operands
to obtain another number, for example, one plus two equals three.
Therefore, it makes no sense to state that if an operator acting on a state function BPCI is equal
lamda times side dog or cat, SPSSI, the state vector, then we can equate all equal lunder.
This makes no sense because you're then equating an operator with a number.
And we have said these are two distinct objects.
That is, one is mistaking apples for bananas.
So this distinction must be clear in our mind.
Moreover, the operators used in quantum mechanics operate on functions rather than on numbers.
Perhaps the simplest, non-trivial, unary operator is the derivation operator, the over the ex unary
because it operates on one function to obtain another function.
For those who know how to take derivatives, for those who do not.
Don't worry, we will not need them anymore.
An example could be that the rebate, the derivation of the exponential function e.
Power to act, which gives two times the same exponential function, two times the power to X, but
nobody would equate the operator the over the X and say this is equal to the operators as one thing
and the numbers are another thing.
Operators act on functions and obtain another function, whereas there are also these big banner operators
we use in our daily experience plus minus charter, which work on function, on numbers and again obtained
numbers.
But in that the quantum operators act on functions and obtain functions.
And these quantum operators, that is observables are also called, by the way.
Q Numbers because they have a formal analogy with numbers.
But remember that they are numbers at all.
Once that has become clear, here are some examples of the observables.
So, for example, in in in in the classical world, we have the position X, whereas this year we have
an example of an observable.
The simplest one is the simplest one is the position operator.
And just we say that the operator for X is that some operator X, which X on the way function and will
give me the position of the Patika.
If that wavefunction is the description of the quantum system, if we want to know the position of a
particle.
Therefore, we have just to multiply the wavefunction with the position variable X and then take the
model square to obtain, as usual, the probability density function of X and which tells us something
about its whereabouts.
The momentum operator that is the observable, which tells me something about the momentum of the particle,
has a form of a derivative operator and it is given by this derivation operator of over a function where
the the over the X times, some constant it will turn out in quantum mechanics that it is minus I times
h bar where I is the imaginary number H bar is Planck's constant divided of by two pi where this comes
from.
This would need all the mathematical interaction and we would see why this is all.
The important point is that you recall that the momentum in classical mechanics was just mass times
the velocity in quantum mechanics.
You must not no longer think as.
Dynamical variables in classical physics, but as operators, that is observables and one operator is
the derivation operator that you may have learned when you have learned a bit of calculus.
If you didn't take a look at the appendix and where we discussed also this aspect, taking the derivative
in space of the wavefunction, therefore time supplying constant bar and an imaginary number will furnish
a mathematical expression that tells us something about the speed of the particle that the wavefunction
describes.
So similarly, the energy operator, which is called the evolution operator, or also Hamiltonian,
has a bit more complex structure.
It is given by a second derivative in space times minus H, but squared over to M, where M is the mass
of the particle, plus A function V of X, which represents the potential energy of the particle.
So we have the operator.
The Hamiltonian age is given by this quantity here, and this is nothing else than an operator, which
if it operates on the way function of a quantum system, it will give me as output the energy of the
system, the oil, the possible energy states of the system.
It is in particular this letter observable, which leads to the famous Schrodinger equation, which
in a compact form can be written here as H operating on the state vector PSI is equal.
The Igan the energy eigenvalue e here in capital letter e e times.
Sorry that this is the Igen equation for the energy state of a system.
Once the wave function of the state vector describing the system is given, one applies the Hamiltonian
as prescribed by the igan equation and we will obtain as eigenvalue e the energy of the state.
The Schrodinger equation is so important because it helps us in obtaining the energy states of any quantum
system as the energy levels of atoms and then nuclei, nuclei or even more complicated objects like
molecules.
Let us make only a brief insertion here that will turn out to be important later, another important
quantity in quantum mechanics is the so-called expectation value of an operator.
That is the average value one obtains by measuring an observable.
Many times it is operatively a fundamental notion in quantum mechanics because in the laboratory, what
one usually must tackle in the real world are average, measured values.
For example, for the position operator X equal small X X, four foot particle one integrates its position
X, weighting it by the probability of finding it in X or in analytical terms.
You can see here it is the integral over all the space, if you wish, or where all the universe of
the way function, say X times the position X times size, the complex conjugate of the wavefunction
itself.
It is the average value of the position of a particle that one expects to obtain after a large number
of measurements.
More generally, this can be written in more compact, compact form by using Dirac's notation, stating
that the expectation value of an operator, a let's call it, just is a letter capital letter.
A in state XYZ is defined as that Brassai.
The operator are on a.
Sigh, as you can see here.
With right with the right hand side, there are brackets as defined in the integral above.
Now, turning back to Schrodinger's equation we saw previously, this is, however, not the most general
equation because this was the time independent Schrodinger equation, while physical systems are in
many cases, time dependent.
There is a factor of time working as everything in the physical world.
It evolves according to time and and we express this by a time dependent function.
Therefore, the time dependent energy operator is called.
There exists also at a time dependent energy operator and which is called evolution, a port operator
and is given by this quantity here.
So we generalize the Hamiltonian to a time dependent operator or parameter to a time t..
And which is age of T equal, uh, quantity, which is again an operator.
The imaginary number times H bar times the derivative operator over time the over the T.
That's why you will frequently find that time dependent Schrodinger equation in this form here you have
the Hamiltonian, that time dependent Hamiltonian who acts on the state vector PSI Kappa Capsid equal
i h bar.
The authority.
Over that.
Same contractor.
This is, again, the time dependent.
Igen equation.
An important property of Schrodinger's equation is that it is linear differential equation is set to
be linear when given to different allowed solutions and say I want MCI to also that some say one plus
two is again and allow the solution.
As an example, you might recall the superposition of two waves forming a new wave as discussed with
the interference phenomenon.
This means that also the sum of two solutions is, again, the solution to this differential equation
or this one, this one, this or this to the to the Schrodinger equation.
This means that the Schrodinger equation is a linear differential equation.
This will be crucial later when we will discuss quantum superposition in principle and also the measurement
measurement problem in a lecture later.
The Hamiltonian operator also defines the time, evolution of the wavefunction from a time zero to a
time T..
In particular, if age is independent of times, the very right age without the time parameter, given
a state size zero at time zero, we have the state vector at 10 00 at an initial time, T equals zero,
the state of the quantum system.
Head of society, at any subsequent time t is generated, Wiecek, it is in quantum mechanics, you
say it's generated by the so-called unitary operator, which is this quantity given here and is expressed
with the exponential unitary operator.
You capital letter U equals E exponential.
Minus I h t over h bar and using this quantity, applying this operator on to the.
State initial, state vector, initial in time, you operating over a cat of site zero, this quantity
here.
Then you obtain the state of the system at a subsequent time, t that is the cat of society.
So this quantity, this equation here tells me how BPCI within this initial state, besides zero, evolves,
develops in time.
And becomes BPCI of tea.
And how do we do that, we just apply the evolution operator you upon the state vector site of zero
at this time zero.
Its main physical interpretation of all of this is that it is an operator, that evolution operator
that does not describe an observable that is a measurement.
The evolution operator is not an observable.
It is something that.
Involves the state function.
In fact, it is the evolution in time of a quantum system.
It gives us an evolution in time of a quantum system.
It changes the face of the wave function or state vector, but not its length.
At.
Imagine a vector and you change the direction, not the length of this vector, this, so to speak,
length conservation that you conserve the length of this state vector reflects nothing else, then the
necessity to conserve, to conserve the sum of all the probabilities associated to the Afghan states
before and after the state evolution.
This case can be expressed using the.
Equation that we used in a previous slide, remember this one where Roquette of BPCI, that is the sum
of all the model, the square of the coefficients must give one.
Then we can generalize this expression from and time independent from this time, independent expression
to the time dependent expression.
But the sum of all the probabilities must always be equal.
One If in in our quantum system there is no interaction from the outside that destroys everything.
But for an isolated quantum system that evolves in time, this expression must be conserved.
Therefore, its name unitary operator because it transforms something.
But unity is conserved.
Moreover, note that if you is a unitary operator that avoids the quantum state forward in time, its
complex conjugate, you star equal a the oil, a number power plus eye HD over each bar sends it backward
in time by an interval to.
Then it becomes obvious that applying first you start the complex conjugate and you consecutively.
This means that it preserves the state, that is it is an equal formal definition of a unit unitary
operator, it is that it satisfies the general relation.
You start times, you equal one because you go forward in time, then you come back.
And nothing has changed, of course.
Again, this must give that this is the identity operator.
It leaves everything identical with the one being a scholar, just a number one or more generally an
identity operator.
That leaves the things as as they are more.
We will tell on this later because this concept of the unitary unitary operator, operator or unitary
of evolution, more generally, it is a very important concept in quantum mechanics, as we will see
this operator reappears throughout our journey and we will discuss its properties in different contexts
again.
For completeness, since we will make use of it when dealing with quantum decoherence, let us point
out how once the Schrodinger equation has been solved and the Igan states with its Igen energies are
known, it is possible to calculate the transition, so-called transition amplitudes.
That is the probability that an atom transitions say, because of the scattering or absorption of a
photon from an initial state capsid to a final state Khaddafi.
Dirac's notation allows to determine the probability that this transition will take place as follows.
Here you see the usual model, the square.
And what is squared is the bracket of the state C two state fee.
So we have an expression in direct annotation of what the probability is that a state that typically
an atom or quantum system transitions from a state BPCI to a state five and.
You express this with the intention of this way, for example, the probability that an atom in isolation
spontaneously transitions from an energetic lower, I can state it e0 to a higher one.
Each one is zero.
Which implies that the bracket of E zero e one equals zero in this case, one speaks of or thought orthogonal
state vectors because geometrically this is displayed as being the ideal state vectors perpendicular
to each other.
Yeah, that's, after all, the meaning of the Igen states and their display in a Cartesian.
Space as multidimensional space where the axis have an orthogonal orthogonal orientation, and if you
make the circle a product of orthogonal vectors, you have always zero, which in quantum mechanical
terms means that the probability to transition from one state to the other is zero.
And that's why the igan states, when we measure them always, always, always, many times there remain
there.
That's the real fundamental meaning of the igan states and orthogonality in quantum mechanics.
However, for any quantum system which is subjected to an outside interaction, say, such as in a scattering
or a measurement process, an atom receives a photon or something like that, the state vectors may
no longer be orthogonal.
And this equation acquires a non-zero value and represents the transition probability from one state
to another.
There is then a certain chance that due to this interaction or measurement, a state transition occurs
in case of atoms eventually by emission or absorption of photons.
This was just a brief introduction to the formalism of quantum mechanics.
We will not go too much to we will not dwell too deep into this formal aspect of quantum mechanics.
I wanted only to make a short, brief and a bit superficial overview of the subject, but it is necessary
because here and there something will always pop up and it will be necessary to have at least an idea
of what's about.